PEP: 9999
Title: Python Security Response Team membership policy
Author: Seth Michael Larson <seth@python.org>
Sponsor: Gregory P. Smith <greg@krypto.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: 24-Jun-2024

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a policy and framework for management of the Python Security Response Team (PSRT).
The PSRT is a "highly trusted cabal of Python developers" which handles security vulnerability disclosures to the ``security@python.org`` mailing list.

PSRT members have access to known vulnerabilities affecting CPython and pip before they're disclosed to the public.
This information is sensitive and if leaked could harm Python users through zero-day attacks, where an attacker has access
to exploitable vulnerabilities before defenders are notified of fixes and given a chance to upgrade.

For this reason reducing excess risk around who has access to this information without hampering the mission of the PSRT is important for Python ecosystem safety.
Establishing a policy around the historically informal process of PSRT membership will provide a method for maintaining minimum effective membership long-term.

Motivation and rationale
========================

The primary goal of this PEP is to keep pre-disclosed vulnerability information to the PSRT on a "need-to-know" basis
without hampering the goals of the PSRT. The primary goal of the PSRT is coordination of vulnerability fixes, including:

* Triaging reports sent to the ``security@python.org`` inbox.
* Determining whether reports constitute a vulnerability in CPython or pip.
* Developing fixes for security vulnerabilities "in-house" or with the help of core developers.
  This includes deciding when a vulnerability is appropriate to work in the open or privately.
* Authoring and publishing security advisories to ``security-announce@python.org`` once fixes are made available.

Members that are actively contributing to the PSRT will be involved in the above processes.

PSRT admins have the additional responsibilities of reviewing submissions to the ``security@python.org`` inbox to prevent spam and abuse
and are responsible for onboarding new members and ensuring PSRT processes are followed.

Who else needs access?
----------------------

Beyond triaging and coordination there are other reasons people need access to vulnerability information
before it is disclosed to the public.

Release managers need access information about security issues to backport fixes to bugfix or security branches of Python.
Release managers may also need to be clued in to security fixes which are happening outside of the typical "feature freeze" or
"bugfixes-only" windows for a release branch.

Steering Council members and infrastructure admins don't necessarily need access to vulnerability information, however
need access to the group itself to oversee operations. For this reason it's appropriate to have at least one member
of the Steering Council on the PSRT.

Specification
=============

This PEP proposes codifying the below policy and management framework for PSRT membership
into the Python Developer Guide. This PEP also proposes immediately pruning the PSRTs existing
membership according to the described policy and publishing the list of active PSRT members after its acceptance.

Membership policy
-----------------

To remain a member of the PSRT, each member must meet at least one of the criteria below:

* Participating on an internal PSRT report discussion at least one vulnerability in the past year (1) (or have been added to the PSRT in the last year).
* Release Managers with at least one non-EOL Python branch.
* Active Steering Council members.

All active Release Managers are expected to be members of the PSRT.

At least two active PSRT members shall serve as admins, determined by the Steering Council.
This PEP proposes the initial set of PSRT admins:

* Ned Deily <nad@python.org>
* Ee Durbin <ee@python.org>
* Seth Larson <seth@python.org>
* Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>

The Steering Council is the final arbiter for determining PSRT admins and members.

Public membership
-----------------

Today it's not public information who is a member of the PSRT and thus who is able to access
vulnerability reports. This PEP proposes that the list of PSRT members be made public similar to
other Python working groups.

Making the PSRT members list public keeps the team accountable to interested parties
like the Steering Council, vulnerability reporters, and users by showing who has access to sensitive
information and is responsible for the end-to-end vulnerability remediation process.

Adding new members
------------------

If the PSRT feels that new members are needed to fulfill its duties new members can be proposed.
The existing group will decide member(s) to add with the expectation being that new members
are prominent people in the Python community. This will be done by fiat with the Steering Council
being the final arbiter for membership decisions.

Release Managers are added to the PSRT as soon as they are accepted by the Steering Council.

New Steering Council members are added after the Steering Council election if there is not at
least one newly active Steering Council member on the PSRT.

Removal of members
------------------

At least once per year PSRT admins will evaluate the members of the PSRT against the membership policy,
determining whether there are members that no longer meet the requirements and removing them from the PSRT.
This PEP recommends that this be an action proposed by the PSRT admins, vetted by the new Steering Council,
and taken within two months after a new SC election.

Steering Council members and Release Managers that are no longer on the Steering Council or
have an active Python branch can remain on the PSRT if they meet any other membership criteria.

As a purely voluntary role, membership can also be given up by the individual member themselves.

Removed members are eligible to be re-added to the PSRT following the process for adding new members.

Upon PEP acceptance, the policy will take effect and remove members who no longer fit the above criteria (2).
Note that for the first round of removals post-PEP acceptance, there will be time given for voluntary stepping-down
and removal of previous PSRT members will happen before publishing the list of PSRT members to avoid publishing members
which haven't opted-in to the new policy with continued PSRT membership.

Where membership is tracked
---------------------------

PSRT members are given access for the following:

* Receive and send emails to the PSRT mailing list.
* Send emails to the Security-Announce mailing list.
* The "Security Response Team" role in the Python Core Developer Discord.
* The "Member" role in the PSRT GitHub team. This team is used to
  authorize access to other private PSRT resources on GitHub.

PSRT admins are additionally given access to the following:

* Admin for the PSRT and Security-Announce mailing lists.
* The "Maintainer" role in the PSRT GitHub team.

When PSRT membership or role changes occur it's the responsibility of PSRT admins
and infrastructure admins to make the appropriate changes in all of the above locations.

Rejected ideas
==============

Should inactive members be more aggressively pruned?
----------------------------------------------------

The PSRT only triages a double-digit number of reports every year, meaning there
aren't an abundance of opportunities to "prove" activity on the scale of months. For this
reason along with aligning with existing yearly schedules, a yearly pruning was recommended.

Not publishing the full list of PSRT members
--------------------------------------------

The status quo for PSRT membership is that only PSRT admins are aware of the
full list of PSRT members.

Because PSRT members have access to sensitive information, PSRT member accounts
are valuable, so it might stands to reason that obscuring who has access to this information
be a valid defensive measure to avoid members or member accounts being targeted.

However, as a part of typical duties all *active*
PSRT members are known to other PSRT members as well as the public through
responding to reports and publishing advisories.

PSRT members are also commonly Python core developers or have similarly privileged accounts
and thus locking down account access is already a critical issue regardless of PSRT membership status.

For these reasons, this PEP doesn't see the additional "visibility" into PSRT membership as a security issue.

Publishing the PSRT members list only for Steering Council, PSF, etc
--------------------------------------------------------------------

An alternative to publishing the list of PSRT members publicly would be to make
the list of members available to only certain groups like the Steering Council,
PSF, etc.

As noted above, PSRT members have public components of the role
and thus are able to be "enumerated" using that method, albeit less easily.

Footnotes
=========

* (1) In the past 6 months the PSRT has received 54 new reports that needed to be triaged leaving plenty of available
  opportunities for PSRT members to meet the required amount per year.

* (2) Today there are 30 members in the PSRT. After applying the following policy there would be 15 members in the PSRT
  which have actively coordinated a vulnerability fix in the past year.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
